.TH CUYO 6 "2014-10-25"
.\"
.\"   Copyright <=2001 by Immanuel Halupczok
.\"   Modified 2002,2006,2012 by the cuyo developers
.\"   Maintenance modifications 2007,2008,2010-2012,2014 by the cuyo developers
.\"
.\"   This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"   the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"   (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"   This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"   Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.\"
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
cuyo - Tetris-like game with many suprises
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcuyo\fR [\fB\-d\fR] [\fB\-f\fR] [\fB\-g \fIwidth\fBx\fIheight\fR] [\fB\-h\fR] [\fB\-?\fR] [\fB\-\-version \fIversions\fR] [\fIld-file\fR]
.P
\fBcuyo \-?\fR
.\".br
.\".B cuyo
.\".RI \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
Use A, D, W and S or the arrow keys to move left, move right, turn and
drop the falling piece. 
Try to put blobs of the same color together. 
(You don't need to form rows or columns. 
Any shape will do.)
When enough blobs of the same color are connected, they explode. 
(What "enough" means depends on the level.)  
Try to make
explosions next to the the grass (or whatever there is in the level
instead of the grass). 
Then, it will explode, too. 
The level is finished when no grass is left.
.br
In some levels, you will need a chain reaction to get rid of the
grass-equivalent. 
And many other things may happen in other levels.
.br
In two-player-mode, each time one player causes an explosion, the other
one gets grey things (which explode when something else explodes
next to them). 
If one player builds a too big tower, the other player may get one of his rows.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Debug mode.
.TP
.B \-f
Fullscreen mode.
.TP
.B \-g \fIwidth\fBx\fIheight
Set the window size.
.TP
.B \-h
Print a short help message and exit with status 0.
.TP
.B \-?
Print a short help message and exit with status 1.
.TP
.B \-\-version \fIversions\fR, \fB\-\-version=\fIversions\fB
Activate special versions of levels and level tracks.
\fIversions\fR is a comma-separated list of version specifiers.
Version specifiers pertaining to difficulty setting, numbers of players,
and level tracks can also be set from the main menu.
See the \fBcual\fP(6)\fR manpage for the relevant values.
The other version specifiers which are actually used in levels
are \fBeco\fR and \fBgeek\fR.

\fBeco\fR makes a very few levels less resource-hungry. 
In the consequence, they also become less beautiful.
.P
If you're trying to design own levels,
you can pass the name of your .ld file (level description file) to test
the level. 
If you do that, this will be the only available level.
.\".SH FILES
.\"Cuyo needs a file called
.\".I main.ld
.\"- the main description file for the levels. 
.\"It includes a lot of other \fI.ld\fR files. 
.\"Also, a directory called
.\".I pics
.\"is needed, with all these small icons in it. 
.\"Cuyo will look for both in different paths. 
.\"If it has been installed correctly, you should have
.\"no problems.
.SH CREATING NEW LEVELS
The main work is to draw all those little icons.
Then you have to create a level description file
which tells cuyo how to put everything together.
There is an example level with many comments.
Its description file is \fBexample.ld\fR.
(It should be part of the cuyo distribution and probably lies
in the same directory as the other cuyo level description files.)
It is rather outdated but may still be a good starting point.
.P
Other Sources of information are:
.TP 2
-
Try \fIman cual\fR. 
Cual - the Cuyo Animation Language - is the format of level description files.
.TP
-
And of course, there are the level description files of the existing levels
(files ending in \fI.ld\fR, probably located somewhere like
\fI/usr/share/games/cuyo/\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcual\fP(6)
.SH BUGS
The level description language is still under development.
.br
In the preferences dialog, some keys are not displayed correctly.
.br
The AI Player is not very intelligent. 
In particular, it doesn't understand
most of the special features of the levels, and so, it sometimes
behaves very silly.
.br
See the 
.I TODO
file for other bugs.
.SH AUTHORS
Mainly Immanuel Halupczok <cuyo@karimmi.de>.
.br
Other contributors to the source code:
Bernhard R. Link, Mark Weyer, Bernhard Seckinger.
.br
Other contributors of levels:
Daniela Lipps, Simon Huggenberger.
